---
layout: exhibit
title: The Story of People's War
author: Vikrant Dadawala
publish_date: 2019-06-15
permalink: /exhibits/a/
---

{% include parallax_image.html collection='pw' pid='pw01' %}


From its party headquarters in Sandhurst Road, Bombay, the CPI published the *People’s War* as part of its multi-pronged strategy to exploit the unprecedented national publicity made possible by its support for the war effort. The years between 1942 and 1945 saw the numbers of CPI members rise dramatically -- from 4,500 in 1942 to over 30,000 full-time members by 1945. By the beginning of 1943, the People’s War claimed a total circulation of over 33,000 in all its editions (English, Hindi, Urdu, and Marathi). There is no reliable way of estimating the actual readership of the newspaper given the widespread practice of multiple newspaper readers sharing a single copy. As such, in the space of just three or four years, the CPI transformed from a criminal political organization to one that could count the editors of the most important newspapers in English, Urdu, and Hindi among the subscribers of its party newspaper.


The filmmaker Khwaja Ahmad Abbas’s account of interviewing P.C Joshi (General-Secretary of the CPI), on an assignment for the Bombay Chronicle, reveals just how incredible this achievement of publicity by a party that had spent more than a decade underground was:

*"A year ago, if the police had managed to locate these premises, one would have read in the newspaper headlines to the effect that “Red Den is Discovered in City”. But today the CPI was legal and its activities might be carried out in broad daylight. This was one of the many contradictions in the present situation -- ex-ministers were in jail, ex- conspirators free; bourgeoisie papers had to close down, while communist papers flourished and could be sold openly even to “Tommies” and American “G.Is”!*

The *People’s War* played a dramatic role in the expansion of the communist public during the war-time years. Just a couple of years ago, the success of the British ban on the import of communist propaganda meant that the few books that were available would be carefully smuggled from hand to hand and typically lent out to select initiates only for a single night of desperate study and note-taking. Suddenly, an alliance with the British meant that the communists had unprecedented access to legal newsprint in a time of acute shortage: enough to produce a stylish tabloid with lavish space afforded to photographs and sketches. As the C.P.I struggled against the nationalist backlash to its support for the British war effort, the circulation of the People’s War came to occupy a key position in its quest to produce committed Bolshevik cadres out of a lose and dispersed federation of volunteers.

Calling for a nation-wide drive to aggressively expand the circulation of the then three-month-old People’s War through the sale of newspapers and the signing up of new subscribers, an editorial dictum in October 1942 constructed an image of the committed revolutionary as one whose commitment to the revolution permeated everyday life -- the Indian Bolshevik should always carry a copy of the People’s War and be ready to disseminate its message to a wider public:

*On your job, wherever you are, don’t fence yourself off from the people, don’t think you have “On Duty” and “Off Duty” hours. You are a Bolshevik not a clerk in a bourgeois office. Wherever you are, whether it is a railway compartment or a tea-shop, fraternize with the people, dig out “People’s War” and read it out to them, discuss with them... Discussing with the people, selling “People’s War”, collecting cash for the party -- this should be your job wherever you are. Wherever there are people, there is a front of work for you.*

Till mid-1943, the People’s War continued to uneasily reflect the contestations that accompanied the CPI’s decision to support the war effort. Devices such as an occasional “Question Box” addressed challenges to the “people’s war” line by ventriloquizing questions on behalf of anonymous figures like “Student Patriot”, “Gujrat Patriot”, and “Bombay Congressman” without letting up on Stalinist ideals of strict party discipline. In its initial phase, the back page of the People’s War was typically a page-length update of the progress of the Eastern front of World War II, with the Red Army framed as the noble and heroic protagonist of the global war against fascism. A headline from the very first issue -- “Chinese, Soviets, Indians: 800,000,000 together” -- set the tone for the newspapers attempt to represent a seamlessly international revolutionary public, as did the frequently featured letters from British, Chinese, and Russian communists addressing Indian leaders.

When a massive famine struck Bengal, Bihar and other parts of British India in 1943, the People’s War took advantage of its special status as a pro-war propaganda outlet to published and circulate unprecedented coverage of war-era food shortages. The circulation of the newspaper expanded significantly. In a letter to the editor of People’s War, the editor of the widely read English-language newspaper The Hindu, congratulated the People’s War for its “yeoman service” in “prodding the authorities out of their complacency” in a time of famine and distress. In a similar vein, Professor D.P Mukherjee of Lucknow University, a pioneering figure in Indian sociology, wrote of how his attitude towards the newspaper had changed over time:

*When the first issue of People’s War appeared I reacted against its title: ‘War’, alright, but it is certainly not for the people of India. But then as People’s War’s attitude began to unfold itself, it became easier for me to think functionally instead of statically... Personally, my all India feeling has been sustained by the manner in which the famine in Bengal, Orissa, and the South has been handled in People’s War.... People's War has been a great corrective to my prejudices (are they only mine?) and I am grateful for it.Only I would want it to be better and still better.*

Professor Mukherjee’s phrase, “my all India feeling”, is idiosyncratic but also revealing, suggesting that the national circulation of affectively powerful representations of mass suffering was a key component of the maturing of the communist public as a nation-wide and multilingual counterpublic, one that continued to punch above its weight for many decades in postcolonial India.
The challenge of adequately representing the famine -- narratively and visually -- transformed the newspaper and created an unprecedented space for visual images. As reports about the food crisis in Bengal and Orissa began to make their way into the pages of the People’s War with increasing frequency through 1943, these came to be accompanied by a series of sketches and photographs. The most famous of these were by the Bengali duo of Chittaprosad and Sunil Janah, respectively, who accompanied the general-secretary P.C Joshi on his tour of Bengal, and ended up joining the permanent staff of the newspaper.

{% include inline_image.html collection='pw' pid='pw05' %}

{% include inline_image.html collection='pw' pid='pw04' %}


The first set of sketches by Chittaprosad depict bodies devastated by famine, who have lost everything -- including their name and their sanity. Sketches of corpses in a morgue emphasize the secular nature of the disaster, with “Muslim” and “Hindu” bodies (religious identites coded through facial hair) lying side-by-side in death. The sketch of a dying activist who had participated in the failed Chittagong rebellion of 1930 (Santi Chakravarty, not included in this paper) is unusual in its details, most victims are little more than the barest of outlines.

Increasingly, the famine of 1943 came to be a symbol and a prism through which structural hunger and malnourishment became representable in the People’s War. Thus, Chittaprosad’s second trip to Bengal is headlined: “Is Bengal heading towards a second famine?” Structural conditions of hunger -- among Dalits, among families headed by single women, and among landless peasants -- continue to be represented through the modality of a single event. Epidemics in other parts of the country raise the rhetorical question: “How long before our whole country becomes Bengal or before our whole people come together to save her?” In one way or the other, this question would continue to haunt Indian communists from the 1940s right through to the world food crises of the 1970s.

From the shadow of war and famine, utopian images of a new kind of “Soviet-Indian” farmer emerged in the pages of the *People's War*: this new farmer was a member of a co-operative, posed for photographs with clenched fists raised in the air, and was organized into cultural troupes that reinvented folk forms. A photograph of a female farmer from Cochin, juxtaposed with another photograph of a group of female farmers, was captioned: “Not a collective from Soviet Land but the daughter of Cochin peasants. A pioneer worker in co- operative farming”. An article on co-operative farms in Uzbekistan was accompanied by a photograph of smiling farmers next to a rich harvest. The tempting headline read: “On the Soviet Pamirs, Nine Miles from India”. With just a stretch of a hand, the People’s War seemed to promise its readers, the dress-rehearsal of socialism that these images were enacting could become reality. The “nine miles” between the U.S.S.R and India could be bridged, and the “daughter of Cochin peasants” could transform into a Soviet farmer.

-
