---
layout: exhibit
title: 'A Dreamworld Called Soviet India'
author: Vikrant Dadawala
publish_date: 2019-06-13
permalink: /exhibits/b/
---

{% include parallax_image.html collection='pw' pid='pw01' %}

The period this collection explores, 1942-1945, was a pivotal moment in the making of modern South Asia. As World War II raged on, Gandhi’s call to the British to “Quit India” (on 8th August 1942) sparked massive demonstrations, strikes, and attempts to create insurgent zones of self- rule. With Japanese forces advancing on the eastern borders of British India, the Government of India cracked down on the movement and jailed virtually the entire leadership of the Congress party. Worsening relations between the Muslim League and the Congress saw the region inch closer and closer towards the genocidal violence of Partition. And in 1943, Bengal found itself in the grips of a catastrophic famine, exacerbated by wartime conditions and by colonial apathy, that resulted in the deaths of an estimated two million people. Against this grim backdrop, the heroic images of soldiers, peasants and workers from the pages of the People’s War functioned as tantalizing tableaus of a possible “Soviet India”: enacting a dress rehearsal of the solemn tasks ahead, and promising a vision of redemption in the future.

Though Communist-inspired utopias had been written in a number of South Asian languages already and though CPI cells were active in many regions, the imagined community of “Soviet India” was really forged during the war-time years, with the People’s War as its textual anchor, and the CPI headquarters in Sandhurst Road acting as its capital. It was forged and integrated through a number of journeys: the photographer-artist duo Sunil Janah and Chittaprosad’s travels through the country; the general secretary P.C Joshi’s tours that negotiated the integration of various communist factions into one party; the parallel journeys of trade unionists and peasant activists from across the country to Bombay for the first ever Party Congress; the journeys of Bombay-based filmmakers like Khwaja Ahmad Abbas to Calcutta and Calcutta-based actors to Bombay that helped the communists present the Bengal famine as a national allegory in films like *Dharti Ke Lal* (Children of Earth; K.A Abbas, 1946); the journeys of film reels from the Soviet Union, via China, that travelled across metropolitan cities in British India for the first time in the 1940s; and the journey of the newspaper itself bringing to anxious readers news from the war front and the socialist fatherland.

In his memoirs, long after he had sundered contact with the party, Sunil Janah would recall his journeys on behalf of People’s War in impressionable prose:

*I travelled all over the country during those years. These travels did not merely mean getting in and out of trains to different and often distant destinations, but of journeys deep into the interiors of the countryside, walking for miles across hills and valleys with companions speaking strange languages. I spoke and understood only two of the twenty- six major languages, and their numerous dialects, spoken in India. What my escorts said to each other and to the villagers passing by were, most often, totally incomprehensible to me. I remember only their reassuring presence at my side in the wide open spaces of the country under a blazing sun, the blue skies, dark with rain clouds at times, the wheat and rice fields with their harvests of green and gold, the dust and distance, and the thatched village huts turning golden at the touch of the setting sun.*

Both the optimism of Janah’s ethnographic portraits of the “peoples of India” (fig. 6) and the despair of his famine photography testify to the painful unmaking of British South Asia during what Gary Wilder (in another context) has called the world historical opening of 1945: the flash of possibility between the “no longer” of late colonialism and the “not yet” of the post-45 Cold War world.

{% include parallax_image.html collection='pw' pid='pw07' %}

In 1945, with the end of World War II, the *People’s War* was replaced by a new weekly, the *People’s Age*. Till 1948, the *People’s Age* charted an uneasy path of constitutional communism.It granted equal space and legitimacy to the Muslim League and the Congress -- which it saw as representing the rights to self-determination of the Muslim and Hindu communities, respectively. As Partition split the subcontinent into two, the Communist Party of India split into two as well, dispatching Syed Sajjad Zaheer (an Urdu poet from an aristocratic family, who had been one of the key figures in the setting up of the PWA) across the border to serve as the founding General- Secretary of the Community Party of Pakistan. B.T Ranadive replaced P.C Joshi as the General- Secretary of the CPI, and pushed the party towards violent confrontation with Nehru’s government. Much of the staff of People’s Age was jailed and the paper was banned from circulation by multiple state governments. Even after the return of the party to a parliamentary path, the national circulation of the People’s Age continued to dwindle, though strong communist movements took root in multiple states, particularly Kerala and West Bengal. The “underground” phase effectively splintered the communist public and transformed its temporality and modes of address, long before the major splits in the Indian communist movement first emerged. Meanwhile, the Bombay circle of “Progressives”, already missing many members post Partition, began to disintegrate. Abbas was unceremoniously thrown out of IPTA. Many prominent writers drifted away from the party-created organisational spaces, and those that remained had to adapt themselves to a far stricter adherence to an ever-changing party line.18 Chittaprosad and Janah both quit the party and formal politics. Janah suffered from depression through the 1950s and 60s and gradually gave up a promising photographic career to emigrate to England. Chittaprosad spent most of his working life in poverty, struggling to make ends meet. His work would remain unseen by any except his family, packed away in large trunks, till the late 1990s.
